Caucher Birkar

Abstract. We show that the augmented base locus coincides with the exceptional locus (i.e. null locus) for any nef R-Cartier divisor on any scheme projective over a field (of any characteristic). Next we prove a semi-ampleness criterion in terms of the augmented base locus generalizing a result of Keel. We also study nef divisors with positive top intersection number, and discuss some problems related to augmented base loci of log divisors.

## 1. Introduction

The base locus of a linear system is a fundamental notion in algebraic and especially birational geometry. The restricted base locus (also called the nonnef locus) and the augmented base locus (also called the non-ample locus) are refinements of the base locus which capture more essential properties of divisors and linear systems. These are closely related to important concepts and problems in birational geometry, eg see [\[4\]\[16\]\[15\]\[9\]\[8\]\[6\]\[2\]](#page-14-0).

We start with some definitions.

The augmented base locus. Let X be a scheme. An R-Cartier divisor is an element of Div(X) ⊗<sup>Z</sup> R where Div(X) is the group of Cartier divisors. A Q-Cartier divisor is defined similarly by tensoring with Q.

<span id="page-0-0"></span>Definition 1.1 Let X be a projective scheme over a field k. The stable base locus of a Q-Cartier divisor L is defined as

$$
\mathbf{B}(L) = \bigcap_{m \in \mathbb{N}, mL \text{ Cartier}} \text{Bs } |mL|
$$

that is, it is the set of those points x ∈ X such that every section of every mL vanishes where m is a positive integer and mL is Cartier. The base locus, stable base locus, and all the other base loci defined below are considered with the reduced induced structure. The augmented base locus of L is defined as

$$
\mathbf{B}_{+}(L) = \bigcap_{m \in \mathbb{N}} \mathbf{B}(mL - A)
$$

where A is any ample Cartier divisor.

Date: December 3, 2013.

<sup>2010</sup> MSC: 14E30, 14A15.

The augmented base locus of R-Cartier divisors on smooth projective varieties was defined in [\[8\]](#page-14-0). For basic properties of the augmented base locus in this context see [\[9\]\[8\]](#page-14-0). We give a different definition which is more convenient for our purposes (the two definitions agree, by Lemma [3.1](#page-5-0) (3) below).

<span id="page-1-0"></span>Definition 1.2 Let X be a projective scheme over a field k. Let L be an R-Cartier divisor on X. We can write L ∼<sup>R</sup> PtiA<sup>i</sup> where A1, . . . , A<sup>r</sup> are very ample Cartier divisors and t<sup>i</sup> ∈ R. The A<sup>i</sup> are not necessarily distinct and the expression is obviously not unique. Define hmLi = P⌊mti⌋ A<sup>i</sup> which depends on the above expression. Next define the augmented base locus of L as

$$
\mathbf{B}_+(L)=\bigcap_{m\in\mathbb{N}}\mathbf{B}(\langle mL\rangle-A)
$$

where A is any ample Cartier divisor.

It turns out that B+(L) does not depend on the choice of A nor the A<sup>i</sup> nor the expression L ∼<sup>R</sup> PtiA<sup>i</sup> (see Lemma [3.1\)](#page-5-0).

Relation with the exceptional locus. Let X be a projective scheme over a field k and L an R-Cartier divisor on X. The exceptional locus of L (also called the null locus when L is nef) is defined as

$$
\mathbb{E}(L) := \bigcup_{L|_V \text{ not big}} V
$$

where the union runs over the integral subschemes V ⊆ X with positive dimension.

Now we come to the first result of this paper.

<span id="page-1-1"></span>Theorem 1.3. Let X be a projective scheme over a field k. Assume that L is a nef R-Cartier divisor with a given expression L ∼<sup>R</sup> PtiA<sup>i</sup> as in [1.2,](#page-1-0) and A is a very ample Cartier divisor on X. Then

$$
\mathbf{B}_{+}(L) = \mathbf{B}(\langle nL \rangle - A) = \text{Bs}|\langle nL \rangle - A| = \mathbb{E}(L)
$$

for any sufficiently divisible n ∈ N.

The theorem was first proved for X smooth, Q-Cartier L, and k algebraically closed of characteristic zero by Nakamaye [\[16\]](#page-14-0) using Kodaira type vanishing theorems, and this was generalized to R-Cartier divisors by Ein-Lazarsfeld-Mustat¸˘a-Nakamaye-Popa [\[8\]](#page-14-0). Nakamaye's result was extended to log canonical varieties by Cacciola-Felice Lopez [\[5\]](#page-14-0) again by using Kodaira type vanishing theorems. They also give some applications to the moduli spaces of curves. Related results concerning the restricted volume are proved on normal varieties by Boucksom-Cacciola-Felice Lopez [\[3\]](#page-14-0).

The theorem was proved by Cascini-M<sup>c</sup>Kernan-Mustat¸˘a [\[6\]](#page-14-0) when k is algebraically closed of positive characteristic using techniques related to Keel [\[12\]](#page-14-0): the main ingredients are Serre vanishing and the Frobenius. Fujino-Tanaka [\[10\]](#page-14-0) employ similar arguments on surfaces using Fujita vanishing and the Frobenius.

We will also use Fujita vanishing (but not the Frobenius).

A semi-ampleness criterion. The following semi-ampleness result was first proved by Keel [\[12\]](#page-14-0) when k has positive characteristic. A simplified proof of Keel's result was given by Cascini-M<sup>c</sup>Kernan-Mustat¸˘a [\[6\]](#page-14-0).

<span id="page-2-0"></span>Theorem 1.4. Let X be a projective scheme over a field k. Assume that L is a nef Q-Cartier divisor on X. Then there is a closed subscheme Z ⊆ X such that

- the reduced induced scheme associated to Z is equal to E(L), and
- L is semi-ample if and only if L|<sup>Z</sup> is semi-ample.

When k has positive characteristic we can use the Frobenius to show that in fact we can take Z = E(L). However, when k has characteristic zero in general we cannot take Z = E(L), by Keel [\[12,](#page-14-0) §3]. Although Z is not unique but some choice can be calculated for any given X, L. It is interesting to see whether the theorem holds if L is only R-Cartier.

Divisors with positive top intersection number. Assume that X is a normal projective variety of dimension d over an algebraically closed field k, and L a nef R-Cartier divisor with L <sup>d</sup> > 0. If L is Q-Cartier, then it is a wellknown fact that L is big. When L is only R-Cartier, Shokurov [\[17,](#page-14-0) Lemma 6.17] shows that L is big if k has characteristic zero, using resolution of singularities and Kawamata-Viehweg vanishing (although he only proves that L ∼<sup>Q</sup> M ≥ 0 but his proof can be extended to show that L is big). Here big means that L ∼<sup>R</sup> A + D where A is an ample R-Cartier divisor and D is an effective R-Cartier divisor. In [\[12,](#page-14-0) Remark 5.5.3], Keel asks whether the same holds in positive characteristic. We show that indeed it holds in a quite general setting.

<span id="page-2-1"></span>Theorem 1.5. Let X be a projective variety (i.e. projective integral scheme) of dimension d over a field k. Assume that L is a nef R-Cartier divisor on X. Then L is big if and only if L <sup>d</sup> > 0.

As Keel points out this result has interesting applications to the structure of extremal rays on varieties. In fact the characteristic zero case already plays a crucial role in the study of extremal rays on the moduli space of pointed rational curves (see Keel-M<sup>c</sup>Kernan [\[13,](#page-14-0) Lemma 2.2] and its many uses therein).

The augmented base locus of log divisors. Let (X, B) be a projective pair over an algebraically closed field k and A a nef and big R-divisor such that L = K<sup>X</sup> +B+A is nef. The locus B+(L) is closely related to the geometry of X. In Section 6 we recall some results and pose some questions concerning such loci.

Acknowledgements. I would like to thank Mircea Mustat¸˘a and Karl Schwede for discussions related to Section 6. This work was supported by a Leverhulme grant.

# 2. Preliminaries

<span id="page-3-0"></span>2.1. The operator h−i. Let L be an R-Cartier divisor with an expression L ∼<sup>R</sup> PtiA<sup>i</sup> as in [1.2.](#page-1-0) Let π : X′ → X be a morphism such that A′ i := π <sup>∗</sup>A<sup>i</sup> is very ample for each i, eg π is a closed embedding or it is obtained by base change as in [2.7](#page-4-0) below. Then we get the expression L ′ := π <sup>∗</sup>L ∼<sup>R</sup> PtiA′ <sup>i</sup> which we can use to define hmL′ i. It is clear that hmL′ i = π ∗ hmLi.

For a coherent sheaf F on X, we often use the notation F hmLi instead of F(hmLi).

2.2. Growth of functions. Let h: Z → Z be a function. We say that the upper growth of h is like m<sup>d</sup> (resp. at most like m<sup>d</sup> ) if

$$
0 < \limsup_{m \to +\infty} \frac{h(m)}{m^d} < +\infty
$$

(resp. lim sup<sup>m</sup>→+<sup>∞</sup> h(m) <sup>m</sup><sup>d</sup> < +∞).

2.3. Divisors. Let X be a projective scheme over a field k. The group of Cartier divisors on X is denoted by Div(X) (this group modulo linear equivalence is denoted Cl(X)). Recall that an R-Cartier divisor (resp. Q-Cartier divisor) is an element of Div(X) ⊗<sup>Z</sup> R (resp. Div(X) ⊗<sup>Z</sup> Q). Such a divisor can be represented as L = PliL<sup>i</sup> where l<sup>i</sup> ∈ R (resp. l<sup>i</sup> ∈ Q) and L<sup>i</sup> are Cartier divisors but this representation is not unique. Two R-Cartier divisors L, L′ are R-linearly equivalent (resp. Q-linearly equivalent) if L − L ′ = PaiN<sup>i</sup> where a<sup>i</sup> ∈ R (resp. a<sup>i</sup> ∈ Q) and N<sup>i</sup> are Cartier divisors linearly equivalent to zero. We denote the equivalence by L ∼<sup>R</sup> L ′ (resp. L ∼<sup>Q</sup> L ′ ).

An R-Cartier divisor L is:

• nef if L · C ≥ 0 for every curve C ⊆ X (a curve is an integral closed subscheme of dimension one);

- ample if L ∼<sup>R</sup> PliL<sup>i</sup> with l<sup>i</sup> > 0 and L<sup>i</sup> ample Cartier divisors;
- effective if L = PliL<sup>i</sup> with l<sup>i</sup> ≥ 0 and L<sup>i</sup> effective Cartier divisors;

• big if L ∼<sup>R</sup> A + D where A is an ample R-Cartier divisor and D is an effective R-Cartier divisor;

• semi-ample if there is a projective morphism f : X → Y over k and an ample R-Cartier divisor H on Y such that L ∼<sup>R</sup> f <sup>∗</sup>H.

2.4. Pairs. A pair (X, B) over a field k consists of a normal quasi-projective variety over k and a Weil R-divisor B with coefficients in [0, 1] such that K<sup>X</sup> +B is R-Cartier where K<sup>X</sup> is the canonical divisor. The pair is klt if for every projective birational morphism f : Y → X from a normal variety the coefficients of B<sup>Y</sup> are all < 1 where K<sup>Y</sup> + B<sup>Y</sup> = f ∗ (K<sup>X</sup> + B).

<span id="page-3-1"></span>2.5. Fujita vanishing theorem. This is a generalization of Serre vanishing theorem. Let X be a projective scheme over a field k, A an ample Cartier divisor, and F a coherent sheaf on X. Then there is a number m<sup>0</sup> such that h i (F(mA + L)) = 0 for any i > 0, m > m0, and nef Cartier divisor L [\[11\]\[14,](#page-14-0) Theorem 1.4.35].

<span id="page-4-1"></span>2.6. Restriction to a hyperplane section. Let X be a projective scheme over a field k, A an effective Cartier divisor, and F a coherent sheaf on X. Tensoring F with the exact sequence

$$
0 \to \mathcal{O}_X(-A) \to \mathcal{O}_X \to \mathcal{O}_A \to 0
$$

gives a sequence

$$
0 \to \mathcal{F}(-A) \to \mathcal{F} \to \mathcal{F} \otimes \mathcal{O}_A \to 0
$$

which is often not exact on the left. However, if A (considered as a closed subscheme) does not contain any of the finitely many associated points of F, then the latter sequence is also exact on the left.

Now if A is a very ample Cartier divisor and if k is infinite, then perhaps after changing A up to linear equivalence we can make sure that A does not contain any associated point of F. To prove this we first reduce it to the case X = P n k and O<sup>X</sup> (A) = OX(1). Then since k is infinite, there are infinitely many hyperplanes defined over k (hence infinitely many choices of A up to linear equivalence) so we can avoid the associated points of F. If k is not infinite we will do a base change to an infinite field to be able to use the above remarks.

<span id="page-4-0"></span>2.7. Base loci and base change. Let X be a projective scheme over a field k and let L be a Cartier divisor on X. Recall that the base locus of L is defined as

Bs 
$$
|L| = \{x \in X \mid \alpha \text{ vanishes at } x \text{ for every } \alpha \in H^0(\mathcal{O}_X(L))\}
$$

As pointed out earlier we consider Bs|L| (and other loci) with the reduced structure. Recall that B(L) = T <sup>m</sup>∈<sup>N</sup> Bs|mL|. If n, n′ ∈ N, then each section α ∈ H<sup>0</sup> (OX(nL)) gives a section α ⊗n ′ ∈ H<sup>0</sup> (OX(n ′nL)) hence Bs|n ′nL| ⊆ Bs|nL|. In particular, B(L) = Bs|mL| for every sufficiently divisible m > 0.

Assume that k ⊆ k ′ is a field extension and that X′ and L ′ are the scheme and Cartier divisor obtained by base change to k ′ . Let π : X′ → X be the corresponding morphism. Since

$$
H^0(\mathcal{O}_X(L')) = H^0(\mathcal{O}_X(L)) \otimes_k k'
$$

we can see that π <sup>−</sup><sup>1</sup> Bs|L| = Bs|L ′ |. This in turn implies that π <sup>−</sup><sup>1</sup>B(L) = B(L ′ ).

Now assume that L is R-Cartier with a given expression L ∼<sup>R</sup> PtiA<sup>i</sup> as in [1.2.](#page-1-0) As pointed out in [2.1,](#page-3-0) hmL′ i = π ∗ hmLi hence π <sup>−</sup><sup>1</sup>B+(L) = B+(L ′ ).

With a little more work we can also see that π <sup>−</sup><sup>1</sup>E(L) ⊇ E(L ′ ). Indeed, let V ′ be a component of E(L ′ ), let W be the closure of π(V ′ ), and let W′ be the scheme obtained from W by base change. If L|<sup>W</sup> is big then L|<sup>W</sup> ∼<sup>R</sup> A<sup>W</sup> + D<sup>W</sup> where A<sup>W</sup> is ample and D<sup>W</sup> is effective. But then L ′ |W′ ∼<sup>R</sup> A′ <sup>W</sup>′ + D′ <sup>W</sup>′ where A ′ <sup>W</sup>′ is ample and D′ <sup>W</sup>′ is effective. Now V ′ \* D′ <sup>W</sup>′ otherwise W ⊆ D<sup>W</sup> which is not possible. So by restricting to V ′ we get L ′ |<sup>V</sup> ′ ∼<sup>R</sup> A′ <sup>V</sup> ′ + D′ <sup>V</sup> ′ which means that L ′ |<sup>V</sup> ′ is big, a contradiction. Therefore π <sup>−</sup><sup>1</sup>E(L) ⊇ E(L ′ ). So if in some situation we want to show that B+(L) ⊆ E(L), then it is enough to show that B+(L ′ ) ⊆ E(L ′ ) because π is surjective.

## 3. The augmented base locus is well-defined

In this section, we show that the augmented base locus as defined in Definition [1.2](#page-1-0) is well-defined. We also show that the definition agrees with [1.1](#page-0-0) and the one in [\[8\]](#page-14-0).

<span id="page-5-0"></span>Lemma 3.1. Let X be a projective scheme over a field k and L an R-Cartier divisor with a given expression L ∼<sup>R</sup> PtiA<sup>i</sup> as in [1.2.](#page-1-0) Then B+(L) as defined in [1.2](#page-1-0) satisfies the following assertions:

P (1) B+(L) does not depend on the choice of A nor the expression L ∼<sup>R</sup> tiA<sup>i</sup> ;

(2) for any positive rational number s we have B+(sL) = B+(L);

(3) B+(L) = T B(L− H) where H runs over all ample R-Cartier divisors so that L − H is Q-Cartier;

(4) if L is Q-Cartier then B+(L) coincides with the one defined in [1.1.](#page-0-0)

Proof. (1) First we show that B+(L) is independent of the choice of A. Indeed let G be any other ample Cartier divisor. Assume x /∈ T <sup>m</sup>∈<sup>N</sup> B(hmLi − A). Then

$$
x \notin \mathbf{B}(\langle mL \rangle - A) = \mathbf{B}(\sum [mt_i] A_i - A)
$$

for some m > 0. Thus x /∈ B( Pl ⌊mti⌋ A<sup>i</sup> −lA) for any sufficiently large l > 0. Since

$$
\sum \lfloor lmt_i \rfloor A_i - \sum l \lfloor mt_i \rfloor A_i
$$

is zero or ample, x /∈ B( P⌊lmti⌋ A<sup>i</sup> − lA), and since lA is sufficiently ample, x /∈ B( P⌊lmti⌋ A<sup>i</sup> − G) = B(hlmLi − G). This shows that

$$
\bigcap_{m \in \mathbb{N}} \mathbf{B}(\langle mL \rangle - A) \supseteq \bigcap_{m \in \mathbb{N}} \mathbf{B}(\langle mL \rangle - G)
$$

The opposite inclusion ⊆ can be proved similarly hence B+(L) is independent of A.

Now we show that B+(L) is independent of the expression L ∼<sup>R</sup> PtiA<sup>i</sup> . Indeed assume that L ∼<sup>R</sup> Pt ′ iA ′ i is another expression. Redefining the indexes we can assume that A′ <sup>i</sup> = A<sup>i</sup> . Let A = PA<sup>i</sup> + G with G ample. Assume that x /∈ T <sup>m</sup>∈<sup>N</sup> B( P⌊mti⌋ A<sup>i</sup> − A). Then x /∈ B( P⌊mti⌋ A<sup>i</sup> − A) for some m hence x /∈ B( Pl ⌊mti⌋ A<sup>i</sup> − lA) for any sufficiently large l > 0. Arguing as above we can show that x /∈ B( P⌊lmti⌋ A<sup>i</sup> − A). Writing lmt<sup>i</sup> = ⌊lmti⌋ + u<sup>i</sup> and lmt′ <sup>i</sup> = ⌊lmt′ i ⌋ + u ′ i , we see that

$$
\left(\sum \lfloor lmt'_i \rfloor A_i - G\right) - \left(\sum \lfloor lmt_i \rfloor A_i - A\right)
$$

$$
\sim_{\mathbb{R}} \sum u_i A_i - \sum u'_i A_i + A - G
$$

is ample hence x /∈ B( P⌊lmt′ i ⌋ A<sup>i</sup> − G) so x /∈ T <sup>m</sup>∈<sup>N</sup> B( P⌊mt′ i ⌋ A<sup>i</sup> − G). In other words,

$$
\bigcap_{m \in \mathbb{N}} \mathbf{B}(\sum [mt_i] A_i - A) \supseteq \bigcap_{m \in \mathbb{N}} \mathbf{B}(\sum [mt'_i] A_i - G)
$$

The opposite inclusion ⊆ can be proved similarly bearing in mind that we are free to change A and G.

(2) It is enough to treat the case when s ∈ N is sufficiently large. It is obvious that B+(sL) ⊇ B+(L). Assume that x /∈ B+(L). Then x /∈ B(hmLi − A) for some m hence x /∈ B(shmLi − sA). Arguing as in (1) we see that x /∈ B(hmsLi − A) which implies that x /∈ B+(sL). That is, B+(sL) ⊆ B+(L). (3) For each m > 0,

$$
\mathbf{B}(\langle mL \rangle - A) = \mathbf{B}(mL - mH_m) = \mathbf{B}(L - H_m)
$$

for some ample R-Cartier divisor Hm. Thus B+(L) ⊇ T B(L − H). Conversely assume x /∈ T B(L − H). Then x /∈ B(L − H) for some H. Since L − H is assumed to be Q-Cartier, mL − mH is Cartier for some sufficiently divisible m > 0. Since mH is sufficiently ample, B(mL − mH) ⊇ B(hmLi − A) hence x /∈ B(hmLi − A) which implies that x /∈ B+(L).

(4) We can write L ∼<sup>Q</sup> PtiA<sup>i</sup> with all the t<sup>i</sup> rational numbers. Pick s ∈ N so that sL is Cartier, st<sup>i</sup> are all integers, and sL ∼ PstiA<sup>i</sup> . Then by (2) and (1) we have

$$
\mathbf{B}_{+}(L) = \mathbf{B}_{+}(sL) = \bigcap_{m \in \mathbb{N}} \mathbf{B}(\sum \lfloor mst_i \rfloor A_i - sA) = \bigcap_{m \in \mathbb{N}} \mathbf{B}(msL - sA) = \bigcap_{m \in \mathbb{N}} \mathbf{B}(mL - A)
$$

But this is the same as B+(L) in Definition [1.1.](#page-0-0)

## 4. Growth of cohomology

The next lemma is similar to [\[6,](#page-14-0) Lemma 2.2].

<span id="page-6-0"></span>Lemma 4.1. Let X be a scheme of dimension d projective over a field k. Assume that L is an R-Cartier divisor with a given expression L ∼<sup>R</sup> PtiA<sup>i</sup> as in [1.2.](#page-1-0) Let F be a coherent sheaf on X. Then the upper growth of h 0 (F hmLi) is at most like m<sup>d</sup> .

Proof. By [2.7,](#page-4-0) we can extend k hence assume it is infinite. Let t be a positive integer such that t<sup>i</sup> ≤ t for every i. By [2.6,](#page-4-1) for each m > 0, we can change the A<sup>i</sup> up to linear equivalence so that

$$
\mathcal{F}\langle mL \rangle = \mathcal{F}(\sum [mt_i] A_i) \subseteq \mathcal{F}(mt \sum A_i)
$$

So by replacing L with t PA<sup>i</sup> it is enough to assume that L is an effective very ample Cartier divisor and enough to show that the upper growth of h 0 (F(mL)) is at most like m<sup>d</sup> . Once again by [2.6,](#page-4-1) we can change L up to linear equivalence so that the sequence

$$
0 \to \mathcal{F}((m-1)L) \to \mathcal{F}(mL) \to \mathcal{F}(mL) \otimes \mathcal{O}_L \to 0
$$

is exact. Now if m ≫ 0, by induction on dimension, the upper growth of

$$
h^{0}(\mathcal{F}(mL)\otimes \mathcal{O}_{L})=h^{0}(\mathcal{F}(mL))-h^{0}(\mathcal{F}((m-1)L))
$$

is at most like m<sup>d</sup>−<sup>1</sup> hence the upper growth of h 0 (F(mL)) is at most like m<sup>d</sup> . 

<span id="page-7-0"></span>Lemma 4.2. Let X be an integral scheme of dimension d projective over a field k. Assume that L is an R-Cartier divisor with a given expression L ∼<sup>R</sup> PtiA<sup>i</sup> as in [1.2.](#page-1-0) Then the following are equivalent:

(1) the upper growth of h 0 (O<sup>X</sup> hmLi) is like m<sup>d</sup> ;

(2) for some coherent sheaf F, the upper growth of h 0 (F hmLi) is like m<sup>d</sup> ;

(3) for any coherent sheaf F whose support is equal to X, the upper growth of h 0 (F hmLi) is like m<sup>d</sup> ;

(4) L is big.

Proof. (1) =⇒ (3): We can extend k to an infinite field hence we can use [2.6.](#page-4-1) Pick an effective sufficiently ample divisor A so that

$$
0 \to \mathcal{F} \to \mathcal{F}(A) \to \mathcal{F}(A) \otimes \mathcal{O}_A \to 0
$$

is exact. Applying Lemma [4.1](#page-6-0) it is enough to show that the upper growth of h 0 (F(A)hmLi) is like m<sup>d</sup> . Thus by replacing F with F(A) we can assume that F is generated by global sections. Each global section corresponds to a morphism O<sup>X</sup> → F. Since X is integral, the morphism is injective if and only if its image is not torsion. Therefore if α1, . . . , α<sup>r</sup> form a basis of H<sup>0</sup> (F) and if φi : O<sup>X</sup> → F corresponds to α<sup>i</sup> , then φ<sup>i</sup> is injective for at least one i otherwise F would be torsion which is not possible as the support of F is equal to X. Therefore h 0 (O<sup>X</sup> hmLi) ≤ h 0 (F hmLi) which implies that the upper growth of h 0 (F hmLi) is like m<sup>d</sup> .

(3) =⇒ (4): Take F = OX(−A) for some sufficiently ample divisor A. Then h 0 (F hmLi) ≫ 0 if m ≫ 0 hence in particular h 0 (OX( P⌊mti⌋ A<sup>i</sup> − A)) 6= 0 for some m ≫ 0. Thus since X is integral, P⌊mti⌋ A<sup>i</sup> − A ∼ D for some effective Cartier divisor D. Therefore

$$
L \sim_{\mathbb{R}} \sum (mt_i - \lfloor mt_i \rfloor) A_i + A + D
$$

which means that L is big.

(4) =⇒ (1): By definition, L ∼<sup>R</sup> A + D where A is an ample R-Cartier divisor and D is an effective R-Cartier divisor. Replacing L with a large positive multiple and then replacing L with hLi allows us to assume that L is Cartier and hmLi = mL for each m > 0. By replacing A we can assume that L ∼<sup>Q</sup> A + D and that A is Q-Cartier. But then D is also Q-Cartier and

$$
h^{0}(\mathcal{O}_{X}\langle mL\rangle) = h^{0}(\mathcal{O}_{X}(mL)) \geq h^{0}(\mathcal{O}_{X}(mA))
$$

for any sufficiently divisible m > 0. Arguing as in the proof of Lemma [4.1](#page-6-0) we can prove that the upper growth of h 0 (O<sup>X</sup> (mA)) is like m<sup>d</sup> .

- (3) =⇒ (2): Obvious.
- (2) =⇒ (1): There is a filtration

$$
0=\mathcal{F}_0\subset \mathcal{F}_1\subset \cdots \subset \mathcal{F}_n=\mathcal{F}
$$

of coherent sheaves such that for each 0 < j ≤ n, there exist a closed embedding f : S → X of an integral scheme S and an ideal sheaf J ⊂ O<sup>S</sup> such that Fj/F<sup>j</sup>−<sup>1</sup> ≃ f∗J (cf. The stacks project [\[19\]](#page-14-0), section on d´evissage of coherent sheaves). Let j be the smallest number such that the upper growth of

h 0 (F<sup>j</sup> hmLi) is like m<sup>d</sup> . Let f : S → X and J be the corresponding embedding and ideal sheaf so that Fj/F<sup>j</sup>−<sup>1</sup> ≃ f∗J . Then from the exact sequence

$$
0 \to H^0(\mathcal{F}_{j-1}\langle mL \rangle) \to H^0(\mathcal{F}_j\langle mL \rangle) \to H^0(\mathcal{J}\langle mL \rangle)
$$

we deduce that the upper growth of h 0 (J hmLi) is like m<sup>d</sup> . By Lemma [4.1,](#page-6-0) dim S = d hence S = X. But then the upper growth of h 0 (O<sup>X</sup> hmLi) is like m<sup>d</sup> . 

<span id="page-8-0"></span>Proposition 4.3. Let X be a projective scheme over a field k. Assume that L is a nef R-Cartier divisor with a given expression L ∼<sup>R</sup> PtiA<sup>i</sup> as in [1.2.](#page-1-0) Let F be a coherent sheaf on X, and let Y be its support and e the dimension of Y . Then

(1) the upper growth of h 0 (F hmLi) is at most like m<sup>e</sup> ;

(2) the upper growth of h i (F hmLi) is at most like m<sup>e</sup>−<sup>1</sup> for any i > 0;

(3) the upper growth of h 0 (F hmLi) is like m<sup>e</sup> if and only if L|<sup>Z</sup> is big for some component Z of Y with dim Z = e.

Proof. We can assume that the theorem holds for coherent sheaves with support of dimension < e. We also may assume that the theorem holds for any closed subscheme of X other than X itself.

(1) This follows from Lemma [4.1.](#page-6-0)

(2) By extending k we can assume that it is infinite. Choose an effective sufficiently ample divisor A. For each m > 0 we can write hmLi + A = A ′ + A ′′ where A′ is ample Cartier and A′′ is sufficiently ample Cartier. Then by Fujita vanishing [\(2.5\)](#page-3-1) we get h i (F(hmLi + A)) = 0 for every m > 0 and i > 0. By [2.6,](#page-4-1) we can choose A so that the sequence

$$
0 \to \mathcal{F} \to \mathcal{F}(A) \to \mathcal{F} \otimes \mathcal{O}_A(A) \to 0
$$

is exact. The dimension of the support of F ⊗ OA(A) is e − 1. Now using the exact sequence

$$
H^{i-1}(\mathcal{F}\otimes \mathcal{O}_A(\langle mL \rangle + A)) \to H^i(\mathcal{F}(\langle mL \rangle)) \to H^i(\mathcal{F}(\langle mL \rangle + A)) = 0
$$

and induction on e we get the result.

(3) As in the proof of Lemma [4.2,](#page-7-0) there is a filtration

$$
0 = \mathcal{F}_0 \subset \mathcal{F}_1 \subset \cdots \subset \mathcal{F}_n = \mathcal{F}
$$

of coherent sheaves such that for each 0 < j ≤ n, there exist a closed embedding f : S → X of an integral scheme S and an ideal sheaf J ⊂ O<sup>S</sup> such that Fj/F<sup>j</sup>−<sup>1</sup> ≃ f∗J .

Assume that the upper growth of h 0 (F hmLi) is like m<sup>e</sup> . Let j be minimal with the property that the upper growth of h 0 (F<sup>j</sup> hmLi) is like m<sup>e</sup> . Let f : S → X and J be the corresponding embedding and ideal sheaf so that Fj/F<sup>j</sup>−<sup>1</sup> ≃ f∗J . Then the upper growth of h 0 (J hmLi) is like m<sup>e</sup> . So in particular J 6= 0 and since S is integral the support of J is equal to S. Moreover, since the upper growth of h 0 (J hmLi) is like m<sup>e</sup> , Lemma [4.1](#page-6-0) shows that dim S ≥ e. On the other hand, S is a subset of Y because F|<sup>X</sup>\<sup>Y</sup> = 0 and because of the surjection

F<sup>j</sup> → f∗J . Thus dim S ≤ e hence dim S = e. Now, by Lemma [4.2,](#page-7-0) L|<sup>S</sup> is big and so we can take Z = S.

Conversely, assume that there is a component Z of Y of dimension e such that L|<sup>Z</sup> is big. In the filtration above, let j be the smallest number such that Z is a component of the support of F<sup>j</sup> . Then Z is a subset of the support of the corresponding f∗J hence Z ⊆ S which in turn implies that Z = S because e = dim Z ≤ dim S ≤ e. It is then enough to show that the upper growth of h 0 (J hmLi) is like m<sup>e</sup> because of the exact sequence

$$
0 \to H^0(\mathcal{F}_{j-1}\langle mL \rangle) \to H^0(\mathcal{F}_j\langle mL \rangle) \to H^0(\mathcal{J}\langle mL \rangle) \to H^1(\mathcal{F}_{j-1}\langle mL \rangle)
$$

and the fact that the upper growth of h 1 (F<sup>j</sup>−1hmLi) is at most like m<sup>e</sup>−<sup>1</sup> by (2). Now apply Lemma [4.2.](#page-7-0)

## 5. Proof of the theorems

Proof. (of Theorem [1.3\)](#page-1-1) By Noetherian induction we can assume that the theorem already holds for any closed subscheme of X not equal to X.

Step 1. We deal with the first equality in the theorem. By definition, B+(L) ⊆ B(hnLi − A) for any n > 0. Moreover, there are positive integers m1, . . . , m<sup>r</sup> such that

$$
\mathbf{B}_{+}(L) = \mathbf{B}(\langle m_1 L \rangle - A) \cap \cdots \cap \mathbf{B}(\langle m_r L \rangle - A)
$$

If n = lm<sup>i</sup> for some positive integer l, then hnLi−lhmiLi is zero or ample hence

$$
\mathbf{B}(\langle nL \rangle - A) \subseteq \mathbf{B}(l \langle m_i L \rangle - A) \subseteq \mathbf{B}(l \langle m_i L \rangle - lA) = \mathbf{B}(\langle m_i L \rangle - A)
$$

Therefore B+(L) = B(hnLi − A) if each m<sup>i</sup> |n.

For the second equality: for any fixed n ′ > 0 divisible by all the m<sup>i</sup> and any sufficiently divisible l > 0 we have

B+(L) = B(hn ′Li−A) = Bs|lhn ′Li−lA| ⊇ Bs|hln′Li−A| ⊇ B(hln′Li−A) = B+(L) Now take n = ln′ .

Step 2. The rest of the proof will be devoted to showing B+(L) = E(L). It is obvious that B+(L) ⊇ E(L) so we will focus on the reverse inclusion. If L|<sup>Z</sup> is not big for every component Z of X (with the reduced induced structure), then B+(L) ⊆ E(L) = X. So we may assume that there is a component Z such that L|<sup>Z</sup> is big. Pick such a Z with maximal dimension, say e. Let Y be the union of the other components, again with the induced reduced structure.

There are ideal sheaves I, J ⊂ O<sup>X</sup> such that the support of I is inside Z but the support of OX/I is inside Y , and the support of J is inside Y but the support of O<sup>X</sup> /J is inside Z (cf. [\[19\]](#page-14-0), section on d´evissage of coherent sheaves). Let Y ′ , Z′ be the closed subschemes defined by I, J respectively. On Z \ Y we have J = 0 and OZ′ = OX. Thus the reduced scheme associated to Z ′ is nothing but Z. Similarly, one shows that the reduced scheme associated to Y ′ is Y . By construction, on Z \ Y we have OZ′ = O<sup>X</sup> and I = O<sup>X</sup> , and on

Y \ Z we have I = 0.

Step 3. We would like to find sections of OX(hnLi − A) which vanish on Y ′ but not on Z ′ . Let I → OZ′ be the composition I ֒→ O<sup>X</sup> → OZ′ and let K,L be its kernel and image respectively. Similarly, let L → O<sup>Z</sup> be the composition L ֒→ OZ′ → O<sup>Z</sup> and let N ,M be its kernel and image respectively. Then by Step 2 on Z \ Y we have L = OZ′ and M = OZ, and on Y \ Z we have L = M = 0. Therefore the support of L,M, I are all equal to Z, and the support of K, N are subsets of Z.

Now we have the exact sequences

$$
0 \to \mathcal{K}(\langle nL \rangle - A) \to \mathcal{I}(\langle nL \rangle - A) \to \mathcal{L}(\langle nL \rangle - A) \to 0
$$

and

$$
0 \to \mathcal{N}(\langle nL \rangle - A) \to \mathcal{L}(\langle nL \rangle - A) \to \mathcal{M}(\langle nL \rangle - A) \to 0
$$

By Proposition [4.3,](#page-8-0) the upper growth of h 0 (M(hnLi − A)) is like n <sup>e</sup> but the upper growth of h 1 (N (hnLi−A)) is at most like n e−1 . On the other hand, again by Proposition [4.3,](#page-8-0) the upper growth of h 0 (L(hnLi−A)) is like n <sup>e</sup> but the upper growth of h 1 (K(hnLi − A)) is at most like n e−1 . Therefore for infinitely many n > 0 we can lift a nonzero section of M(hnLi −A) to a section of L(hnLi −A) and in turn to a section of I(hnLi − A). In other words, there is a section α ∈ H<sup>0</sup> (I(hnLi − A)) whose restriction to Z is nonzero. Since I is the ideal sheaf of Y ′ , α vanishes on Y ′ when considered as a section of O<sup>X</sup> (hnLi −A) via the injection I(hnLi − A) → O<sup>X</sup> (hnLi − A).

Step 4. From now on we consider α as a section of O<sup>X</sup> (hnLi − A). We can think of α as a morphism O<sup>X</sup> → OX(hnLi −A) such that if we tensor this with O<sup>Z</sup> then we obtain a nonzero morphism. Let α<sup>1</sup> := α and let T<sup>1</sup> be the kernel of α1. Let α<sup>2</sup> be the composition

$$
\mathcal{O}_X \to \mathcal{O}_X(\langle nL \rangle - A) \to \mathcal{O}_X(2\langle nL \rangle - 2A) \to \mathcal{O}_X(\langle 2nL \rangle - 2A)
$$

where the first morphism is α1, the second one is obtained by tensoring α<sup>1</sup> with O<sup>X</sup> (hnLi − A), and the third one comes from the choice of an injective morphism O<sup>X</sup> → O<sup>X</sup> (h2nLi − 2hnLi) (which exists because h2nLi − 2hnLi is zero or very ample) and tensoring it with OX(2hnLi − 2A).

Let T<sup>2</sup> be the kernel of α2. Obviously, T<sup>1</sup> ⊆ T2. Inductively we can define α<sup>i</sup> to be the composition

$$
\mathcal{O}_X \to \mathcal{O}_X(\langle (i-1)nL \rangle - (i-1)A) \to \mathcal{O}_X(\langle (i-1)nL \rangle + \langle nL \rangle - iA) \to \mathcal{O}_X(\langle inL \rangle - iA)
$$

where the first map is α<sup>i</sup>−1, the second map is obtained by tensoring α<sup>1</sup> with OX(h(i − 1)nLi − (i − 1)A), and third one is obtained from the choice of an injective morphism O<sup>X</sup> → OX(hinLi − h(i − 1)nLi − hnLi). Again it is obvious that T<sup>i</sup>−<sup>1</sup> ⊆ T<sup>i</sup> .

Step 5. By the Noetherian property, there is r such that T<sup>r</sup> = T<sup>r</sup>+1 = · · · . Since α<sup>1</sup> restricted to Z is nonzero and since Z is integral, we can make sure that the restriction of each α<sup>i</sup> to Z is also nonzero. Indeed if U ⊂ Z is a small

nonempty open set, then the restriction to U of each map in the definition of αi is an isomorphism. Therefore each α<sup>i</sup> is nonzero hence T<sup>r</sup> ( O<sup>X</sup> .

Now tensor α<sup>r</sup> with OX(−hrnLi + rA) and let E be its image in OX. Then we get the exact sequence

$$
0 \to \mathcal{T}_r(-\langle rnL \rangle + rA) \to \mathcal{O}_X(-\langle rnL \rangle + rA) \to \mathcal{E} \to 0
$$

Let E be the closed subscheme defined by E, that is, E is the zero subscheme of αr. Note that E 6= X otherwise E = 0 hence α<sup>r</sup> = 0 which is not possible.

We will argue that B(hmLi − A) ⊆ E if m > 0 is sufficiently divisible. If E = X topologically, then the claim is trivial. So we may assume that E 6= X topologically. By construction, α<sup>r</sup> does not vanish outside E hence B(hrnLi − rA) ⊆ E. If m = lrn, then

$$
\mathbf{B}(\langle mL \rangle - A) \subseteq \mathbf{B}(l \langle rnL \rangle - A) \subseteq \mathbf{B}(l \langle rnL \rangle - lA) = \mathbf{B}(\langle rnL \rangle - A) \subseteq \mathbf{B}(\langle rnL \rangle - rA) \subseteq E
$$

Step 6. We will assume that r ≫ 0. Consider the exact sequence

$$
0 \to \mathcal{T}_r(\langle mL \rangle - \langle rnL \rangle + rA - aA) \to \mathcal{O}_X(\langle mL \rangle - \langle rnL \rangle + rA - aA) \to \mathcal{E}(\langle mL \rangle - aA) \to 0
$$
  
Since  $\mathcal{T}_r$  does not depend on  $r \ge 0$ , be Fritte explicitly, we may assume that

Since 
$$
\mathcal{T}_r
$$
 does not depend on  $r \gg 0$ , by Fujita vanishing, we may assume that

$$
H^{i}(\mathcal{T}_{r}(\langle mL \rangle - \langle rnL \rangle + rA - aA)) = 0
$$

and

$$
H^{i}(\mathcal{O}_{X}(\langle mL \rangle - \langle rnL \rangle + rA - aA)) = 0
$$

for any i > 0, m > rn, and 0 ≤ a ≤ 1. Therefore H<sup>i</sup> (E(hmLi − aA)) = 0 if i > 0, m ≫ 0, and 0 ≤ a ≤ 1 (in this proof we only need to consider a = 1 but in the proof of Theorem [1.4](#page-2-0) we need to take a = 0).

On the other hand, we have the exact sequence

$$
0 \to \mathcal{E}(\langle mL \rangle - aA) \to \mathcal{O}_X(\langle mL \rangle - aA) \to \mathcal{O}_E(\langle mL \rangle - aA) \to 0
$$

from which we obtain the exact sequence

$$
H^0(\mathcal{O}_X(\langle mL \rangle - aA)) \to H^0(\mathcal{O}_E(\langle mL \rangle - aA)) \to H^1(\mathcal{E}(\langle mL \rangle - aA)) = 0
$$
  
if  $m \gg 0$  and  $0 \le a \le 1$ .

Step 7. From the expression L ∼<sup>R</sup> P P tiA<sup>i</sup> we obtain the expression L|<sup>E</sup> ∼<sup>R</sup> tiA<sup>i</sup> |E. For each m > 0 we get hmLi|<sup>E</sup> = hmL|Ei. Taking a = 1 in Step 6, recalling that B(hmLi − A) ⊆ E if m > 0 is sufficiently divisible, and using Step 1, we deduce that

$$
\mathbf{B}_{+}(L) = \mathbf{B}(\langle mL \rangle - A) = \text{Bs} |\langle mL \rangle - A|
$$

$$
= \text{Bs} |\langle mL|_{E} \rangle - A|_{E}| = \mathbf{B}(\langle mL|_{E} \rangle - A|_{E}) = \mathbf{B}_{+}(L|_{E})
$$

for any sufficiently divisible m > 0.

On the other hand, it is easy to see that E(L|E) ⊆ E(L). Indeed, let V be a component of E(L|E). Then (L|E)|<sup>V</sup> is not big so L|<sup>V</sup> is not big hence V ⊆ E(L). Finally using the Noetherian induction and the above results we get

$$
\mathbb{E}(L) \subseteq \mathbf{B}_{+}(L) = \mathbf{B}_{+}(L|_{E}) = \mathbb{E}(L|_{E}) \subseteq \mathbb{E}(L)
$$

The augmented base locus of real divisors over arbitrary fields <sup>13</sup> which in particular implies that B+(L) = E(L).

Proof. (of Theorem [1.4\)](#page-2-0) We may assume that the theorem holds for closed subscheme of X other than X itself. Moreover, by replacing L with a multiple we can assume that it is Cartier. If E(L) = X, the theorem is trivial. So we assume this is not the case. Let E be the subscheme constructed in Step 5 of the proof of Theorem [1.3.](#page-1-1) We showed that if m ≫ 0, the map

$$
H^0(\mathcal{O}_X(mL)) \to H^0(\mathcal{O}_E(mL))
$$

is surjective (by taking a = 0). Moreover, we showed that E(L|E) = E(L). Since

$$
\mathbf{B}(L) \subset \mathbf{B}_+(L) = \mathbb{E}(L) \subseteq E
$$

we have B(L) = B(L|E). Thus L is semi-ample if and only if L|<sup>E</sup> is semiample. Since the theorem already holds for E by assumptions, there is a closed subscheme Z of E whose reduction is E(L|E) and such that L|<sup>E</sup> is semi-ample if and only if L|<sup>Z</sup> is semi-ample. Now L is semi-ample if and only if L|<sup>Z</sup> is semi-ample.

Proof. (of Theorem [1.5\)](#page-2-1) Assume that L <sup>d</sup> > 0. Let A be a sufficiently ample effective Cartier divisor. Let L ∼<sup>R</sup> PtiA<sup>i</sup> be an expression as in [1.2.](#page-1-0) First we show that the upper growth of h 0 (OX(hmLi + A)) is like m<sup>d</sup> . By Fujita vanishing [\(2.5\)](#page-3-1), h i (O<sup>X</sup> (hmLi + A)) = 0 for any i > 0 and m > 0. Thus

$$
\mathcal{X}(\mathcal{O}_X(\langle mL \rangle + A)) = h^0(\mathcal{O}_X(\langle mL \rangle + A))
$$

On the other hand, by the asymptotic Riemann-Roch theorem the upper growth of X (O<sup>X</sup> (hmLi + A)) is like the upper growth of (hmLi + A) d . For each m > 0, there is an ample R-Cartier divisor G<sup>m</sup> such that hmLi + A = mL + G<sup>m</sup> hence (hmLi + A) <sup>d</sup> > m<sup>d</sup>L <sup>d</sup> which shows that the upper growth of (hmLi + A) d is like m<sup>d</sup> . Therefore the upper growth of h 0 (O<sup>X</sup> (hmLi + A)) is like m<sup>d</sup> .

Now consider the exact sequence

$$
0 \to \mathcal{O}_X(\langle mL \rangle - A) \to \mathcal{O}_X(\langle mL \rangle + A) \to \mathcal{O}_{2A}(\langle mL \rangle + A) \to 0
$$

By Lemma [4.1,](#page-6-0) the upper growth of h 0 (O2<sup>A</sup>(hmMi + A)) is at most like m<sup>d</sup>−<sup>1</sup> hence the upper growth of h 0 (OX(hmLi − A)) is like m<sup>d</sup> . Since X is integral, hmLi − A ∼ D for some effective Cartier divisor D. Therefore mL ∼<sup>R</sup> A′ + D for some ample R-Cartier divisor A′ hence L is big.

Conversely assume that L is big. So by definition L ∼<sup>R</sup> A′+D for some ample R-Cartier divisor A′ and effective R-Cartier divisor D. By replacing L, A′ , D appropriately we can assume that A ′ is a general very ample Cartier divisor. Let S be an irreducible component of A′ with the induced reduced structure. Since dim S = d − 1 and since L|<sup>S</sup> is big, by induction on dimension, (L|S) <sup>d</sup>−<sup>1</sup> > 0 hence L d−1 · S > 0 which implies that L <sup>d</sup> = L d−1 · A′ + L d−1 · D > 0.

## 6. The augmented base locus of log divisors

Assume that X is a normal projective variety of dimension d over an algebraically closed field k, and that B, A ≥ 0 are R-divisors. Moreover, suppose A is nef and big and L = K<sup>X</sup> + B + A is nef.

Theorem 6.1. Assume L <sup>d</sup> = 0. Then B+(L) = X is covered by rational curves C with L · C = 0.

The theorem was proved by Cascini-Tanaka-Xu [\[7\]](#page-14-0) and independently by M<sup>c</sup>Kernan, when k has positive characteristic. A short proof of this in any characteristic was given in [\[1\]](#page-14-0). Now if L <sup>d</sup> > 0, what can we say about B+(L)? For example, is it again covered by rational curves intersecting L trivially? We give a couple of examples to shed some light on this question.

Example 6.2 Let E be an elliptic curve over an algebraically closed field k and let X = P(O<sup>E</sup> ⊕OE(1)). The surjection O<sup>E</sup> ⊕OE(1) → O<sup>E</sup> defines a section of the projection X → E whose image will be denoted by E again. Moreover, there is a birational contraction X → Z which contracts only E. Let B = E and A be the pullback of a sufficiently ample divisor on Z. Let L = K<sup>X</sup> +B+A. By construction, B+(L) = E(L) = E which is not covered by rational curves but at least it is covered by curves intersecting L trivially.

Example 6.3 There is a projective surface S over an algebraically closed field k so that there is a nef prime divisor M such that κ(M) = 0, K<sup>S</sup> +2M ∼ 0, and if M · C = 0 for any curve C then C = M (see Shokurov [\[18,](#page-14-0) Example 1.1] for such an example). Let X = P(O<sup>S</sup> ⊕ OS(1)). The surjection O<sup>S</sup> ⊕ OS(1) → O<sup>S</sup> defines a section of the projection π : X → S whose image will be denoted by S again. Moreover, there is a birational contraction X → Z which contracts only S to a point. Let B = S + 3π <sup>∗</sup>M and let A be the pullback of a sufficiently ample divisor on Z. Let L = K<sup>X</sup> +B+A. Then B+(L) = E(L) ⊆ S. Moreover, since

$$
L|_S = (K_X + S + 3\pi^*M + A)|_S \sim K_S + 3M \sim M
$$

is not big, B+(L) = E(L) = S. But there is no family of curves C covering S with the property L · C = 0.

These examples show that we need to put some reasonably strong condition on X, B, A to be able to say something interesting about B+(L).

Question 6.4. Assume that (X, B) is a projective klt pair over an algebraically closed field k and A a nef and big R-divisor. Assume that L = K<sup>X</sup> + B + A is nef and that L <sup>d</sup> > 0. Is it true that B+(L) is covered by rational curves C with L · C = 0?

Assume that k = C. Then L in the question is semi-ample by the base point free theorem hence it defines a contraction X → Y . Moreover, it is well-known that the fibres of X → Y are covered by rational curves. Note that B+(L) is nothing but the union of the fibres of X → Y .

Now assume that k has characteristic p > 5 and dim X ≤ 3. One can show that L is again semi-ample (if dim X = 2, this holds for any p [\[20\]](#page-14-0)). We sketch

the proof. Since A is nef and big, we can change the situation so that it is ample [\[1,](#page-14-0) Lemma 8.2]. Using boundedness of the length of extremal rays [\[12\]\[1,](#page-14-0) 3.3] one can show that L = Pri(K<sup>X</sup> + B<sup>i</sup> + Ai) where r<sup>i</sup> > 0, Pr<sup>i</sup> = 1, B<sup>i</sup> , A<sup>i</sup> are effective Q-divisors, A<sup>i</sup> is ample, (X, Bi) is klt, and K<sup>X</sup> +B<sup>i</sup> +A<sup>i</sup> is nef and big. Now applying [\[1,](#page-14-0) Theorem 1.4][\[21\]](#page-14-0) each K<sup>X</sup> + B<sup>i</sup> + A<sup>i</sup> is semi-ample hence L is also semi-ample. Thus L defines a contraction X → Y . In particular, B+(L) is covered by a family of curves intersecting L trivially. Using the results of [\[1\]](#page-14-0) it does not seem hard to prove that the fibres of X → Y are actually covered by rational curves.

Assume that k has positive characteristic and dim X ≥ 4. It seems hard to answer the question in this case because of the lack of resolution of singularities. However, if replace the klt condition with strongly F-regular, then it is likely that one can actually answer the question.

### <span id="page-14-0"></span>References

- [1] C. Birkar; Existence of flips and minimal models for 3-folds in char p. arXiv:1311.3098.
- [2] C. Birkar, Z. Hu; Log canonical pairs with good augmented base loci. To appear in Compositio Math. arXiv:1305.3569v2.
- [3] S. Boucksom, S. Cacciola, A. Felice Lopez; Augmented base loci and restricted volumes on normal varieties. arXiv:1305.4284.
- [4] S. Boucksom, J-P. Demailly, M. Pˇaun, Th. Peternell; The pseudo-effective cone of a compact Kahler manifold and varieties of negative Kodaira dimension. J. Algebraic Geom. 22 (2013), 201-248
- [5] S. Cacciola, A. Felice Lopez; Nakamaye's theorem on log canonical pairs. arXiv:1303.7156.
- [6] P. Cascini, J. M<sup>c</sup>Kernan, M. Mustat¸˘a; The augmented base locus in positive characteristic. To appear in Shokurov's conference proceedings.
- [7] P. Cascini, H. Tanaka, C. Xu; On base point freeness in positive characteristic. arXiv:1305.3502v1.
- [8] L. Ein, R. Lazarsfeld, M. Mustat¸˘a, M. Nakamaye, M. Popa; Restricted volumes and base loci of linear series. Amer. J. Math., 131(3), (2009), 607-651.
- [9] L. Ein, R. Lazarsfeld, M. Mustat¸˘a, M. Nakamaye, M. Popa; Asymptotic invariants of base loci. Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble) 56, (2006) 1701-1734.
- [10] O. Fujino, H. Tanaka; On log surfaces. Proc. Japan Acad. Ser. A Math. Sci. Volume 88, Number 8 (2012), 109-114.
- [11] T. Fujita; Vanishing theorems for semipositive line bundles. In Algebraic geometry (Tokyo/Kyoto, 1982), 519-528, Lecture Notes in Math. 1016, Springer, Berlin, 1983.
- [12] S. Keel; Basepoint freeness for nef and big line bundles in positive characteristic. Annals of Math, Second Series, Vol. 149, No. 1 (1999), 253–286.
- [13] S. Keel, J. McKernan; Contractible extremal rays on M0,n. arXiv:alg-geom/9607009v1.
- [14] R. Lazarsfeld; Positivity in algebraic geometry. I. Springer-Verlag (2004).
- [15] M. Nakamaye; Base loci of linear series are numerically determined. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 355 (2002), 551-566.
- [16] M. Nakamaye; Stable base loci of linear series. Math. Ann. 318 (2000), 837-847.
- [17] V.V. Shokurov; 3-fold log models. Algebraic geometry, 4. J. Math. Sci. 81 (1996), no. 3, 2667-2699.
- [18] V.V. Shokurov; Complements on surfaces. Algebraic geometry, 10. J. Math. Sci. (New York) 102 (2000), no. 2, 3876–3932.
- [19] The stacks project. Website: http://stacks.math.columbia.edu.

- [20] H. Tanaka; Minimal models and abundance for positive characteristic log surfaces. arXiv:1201.5699v2.
- [21] C. Xu; On base point free theorem of threefolds in positive characteristic. arXiv:1311.3819.

DPMMS, Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Cambridge University, Wilberforce Road, Cambridge, CB3 0WB, UK email: c.birkar@dpmms.cam.ac.uk